feature: S3C-3669 bucket encryption design (#43)
scality/citadel: docs/design/bucket-encryption.md

encrypted:

* if the algorithm value is **AES256**:

  * create server-side bucket encryption parameters if they do not
    exist yet in the `serverSideEncryption` bucket metadata field:

    * set the `algorithm` attribute to `AES256` and the
    `masterKeyId` to a new master key ID for that bucket, as well as
    `cryptoScheme` with value `1`. Do **not** set the
    `mandatory` field, as this configuration shall not apply
    automatically to new objects.

  * encrypt the object with a new data key, itself encrypted with the
    bucket master key

  * store the encrypted data key and master key ID (the same as the
    bucket master key ID) in the object metadata

* if the algorithm value is **aws:kms** and a master key ID is provided:

  * encrypt the object with a new data key, itself encrypted with the
    user-specified master key

  * store the encrypted data key and user-specified master key ID in
    the object metadata. Do not create or alter the bucket server-side
    encryption parameters.

* if the algorithm value is **aws:kms** but no master key ID is
  provided, follow the **AES256** logic above.

## Bucket Policies

> **TODO**: determine if they are needed. They can prevent from changing

Reviewer: As discussed on slack, we can remove bucket policies from our plan because our customers only want to prevent unencrypted objects in buckets.

master key ID to use by providing the extra
"x-amz-scal-server-side-encryption-aws-kms-key-id" header, although
the create_encrypted_bucket.js script does not provide this option.

We plan to keep the compatibility with those headers for now but the
compatibility will be removed eventually in favor of the bucket
encryption API.

## Bucket Encryption API

We now support bucket encryption using the standard S3 APIs, to enable
or disable encryption on existing buckets:

- [PutBucketEncryption](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/API_PutBucketEncryption.html)

- [GetBucketEncryption](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/API_GetBucketEncryption.html)

- [DeleteBucketEncryption](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/API_DeleteBucketEncryption.html)

### PutBucketEncryption

We support the following rule to enable encryption automatically on
all objects in the bucket:

```
<ServerSideEncryptionConfiguration xmlns="http://s3.amazonaws.com/doc/2006-03-01/">
   <Rule>
      <ApplyServerSideEncryptionByDefault>
         <SSEAlgorithm>AES256</SSEAlgorithm>
      </ApplyServerSideEncryptionByDefault>
   </Rule>

>    ...

Author: Yes sounds good to me

>    ...

Author: Maybe the code already checks this, but it should then return an error if there are multiple rules.

master key ID has been specified explicitly in the "KMSMasterKeyId"
tag during PutBucketEncryption, and it is also stored in this section
under the `configuredMasterKeyId` field, and will take precedence over
the `masterKeyId` when applying the default encryption parameters to
objects:

```
serverSideEncryption: {
    cryptoScheme: 1,
    algorithm: "aws:kms",
    masterKeyId: "48c5b43c9ba57f052deac9c081b2f1a6954dd2886e82f71679bc640a4a0e731b",
    mandatory: true,
    configuredMasterKeyId: "f04e1f176cfc3dd1f104921dc9e1aff82cb15c3c534ee973ff5653e32c7c439d"
}
```

**Note**: this default configured master key ID to use is stored
separately from the bucket managed master key ID in the
`serverSideEncryption` section, because it can be set or removed
dynamically by the bucket encryption configuration API and should not
alter the existing (permanent) bucket encryption managed key that is
used to encrypt objects without an explicit KMS key ID.

### Legacy Bucket Encryption Configuration (create_encrypted_bucket.js)

For buckets that were created encrypted in previous releases using the
`create_encrypted_bucket.js` script, the metadata format is the same

> than in section [Default Encryption Configuration With "AES256"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as in the section [Default Encryption Configuration With "AES256"
```

Algorithm](#default-encryption-configuration-with-aes256-algorithm).

> This way, we can treat is in the same way, simplifying the logic and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This way, we can treat it in the same way, simplifying the logic and
```

```

The script is creating a bucket through the REST API, passing an extra
proprietary header "x-amz-scal-server-side-encryption: AES256" to
enable encryption using a newly created bucket master key stored in
the KMS server, and referenced from the bucket metadata.

It's also possible with the existing REST API to specify an existing
master key ID to use by providing the extra
"x-amz-scal-server-side-encryption-aws-kms-key-id" header, although
the create_encrypted_bucket.js script does not provide this option.

We plan to keep the compatibility with those headers for now but the
compatibility will be removed eventually in favor of the bucket
encryption API.

## Bucket Encryption API

We now support bucket encryption using the standard S3 APIs, to enable
or disable encryption on existing buckets:

- [PutBucketEncryption](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/API_PutBucketEncryption.html)

- [GetBucketEncryption](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/API_GetBucketEncryption.html)

- [DeleteBucketEncryption](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/API/API_DeleteBucketEncryption.html)

> ### PutBucketEncryption

Reviewer 3: Do we already implement the BucketKeyEnabled rule? We should explicitely tell it in this doc.

We support the following rule to enable encryption automatically on
all objects in the bucket:

```
<ServerSideEncryptionConfiguration xmlns="http://s3.amazonaws.com/doc/2006-03-01/">
   <Rule>
      <ApplyServerSideEncryptionByDefault>
         <SSEAlgorithm>AES256</SSEAlgorithm>
      </ApplyServerSideEncryptionByDefault>
   </Rule>
   ...
</ServerSideEncryptionConfiguration>
```

Alternatively, we also allow specifying a master key ID to use for the
bucket that will be sent when contacting the KMS via the
KMSMasterKeyID tag, instead of letting S3C generate one automatically:

```
<ServerSideEncryptionConfiguration xmlns="http://s3.amazonaws.com/doc/2006-03-01/">
   <Rule>
      <ApplyServerSideEncryptionByDefault>

>          <SSEAlgorithm>aws:kms</SSEAlgorithm>

Reviewer 2: I just discovered AWS allows a PutBucketEncryption with algo `aws:kms` and no specified `KMSMasterKeyID`. a subsequent GetBucketEncryption does not return a key id either.

Author: Yes, so we need to condition `aws:kms` **and** key provided in order to use a configured key and return it via GetBucketEncryption, correct? otherwise it's equivalent to AES256.

Reviewer 2: Yes, I imagine it effects billing on AWS, but for our use its the same.

default encryption applied to new objects automatically, its metadata
`serverSideEncryption` looks like this:

```
serverSideEncryption: {
    cryptoScheme: 1,
    algorithm: "AES256",
    masterKeyId: "48c5b43c9ba57f052deac9c081b2f1a6954dd2886e82f71679bc640a4a0e731b"
}
```

* **cryptoScheme** is used to version the encryption method and
  parameters used internally, like the "salt" value.

* **algorithm** should be "AES256" (the only supported algorithm).

* **masterKeyId** is the bucket's managed master encryption key ID. It
  is normally the identifier of the encryption key stored by the KMS
  server to encrypt/decrypt the individual object encryption keys for
  the bucket, when the user does not provide its own KMS key ID to use
  in the "aws:kms" encryption mode (and when the default bucket
  encryption does not contain an explicit one). It may also be the
  hex-encoded master encryption key itself if there is no KMS server,
  such as in this example (for testing purpose).

**Note**: On AWS, the master key ID is an ARN of the form
  "arn:aws:kms:region:account:key/uuid". S3C does not follow this
  convention, in this example it is a "file" backend key (only used

>   for testing), and key IDs look different with a real KMS server.

Reviewer 3: Are we sure it won't break any compatibility with S3 clients?

Author: I don't know about this, but this part will be unchanged compared to what already exists, so assuming clients work with the current scheme, they should still work with the new API support.

If it indeed does break the compatibility for certain clients that we would not have seen yet, it's a new issue and the best would be to tackle it as a separate bug ticket.

"x-amz-server-side-encryption-customer-algorithm": "",
```

* **x-amz-server-side-encryption** is set to the encryption algorithm,
    "AES256", or "aws:kms" if there is a custom KMS key ID that should
    be returned when fetching object metadata (HEAD object request)

* **x-amz-server-side-encryption-aws-kms-key-id** is the identifier of
    the KMS master key used to encrypt/decrypt the object data encryption
    key, set in all encryption modes.

* **x-amz-server-side-encryption-customer-algorithm**: always set to
    the empty string, relates to customer-provided keys mode (SSE-C)
    which is not supported at the moment.

Each data location object also contains the following attributes:

```
"location": [
    {
        // other location attributes: "key" etc.
        "cryptoScheme": 1,
        "cipheredDataKey": "d88SLogLTw8nzRyO0Tf0qynQPLubT0N9mBDAxEZ5ww0="
    }
]
```

* **cryptoScheme** is used to version the encryption method and
  parameters used internally, like the "salt" value.

* **cipheredDataKey** is the object data encryption key, itself stored
  encrypted with the master key

## Bucket Policies

> We currently do not plan to support bucket policies related to encryption.

Reviewer 3: Can you specify the name of the related conditions? 
I guess it's:
- s3:x-amz-server-side-encryption
- s3:x-amz-server-side-encryption-aws-kms-key-id

Author: Yes, or only `s3:x-amz-server-side-encryption` should be enough for the purpose, I will add a precision.

"x-amz-server-side-encryption-aws-kms-key-id": "48c5b43c9ba57f052deac9c081b2f1a6954dd2886e82f71679bc640a4a0e731b",
"x-amz-server-side-encryption-customer-algorithm": "",
```

* **x-amz-server-side-encryption** is set to the encryption algorithm,
    "AES256", or "aws:kms" if there is a custom KMS key ID that should
    be returned when fetching object metadata (HEAD object request)

* **x-amz-server-side-encryption-aws-kms-key-id** is the identifier of
    the KMS master key used to encrypt/decrypt the object data encryption
    key, set in all encryption modes.

* **x-amz-server-side-encryption-customer-algorithm**: always set to
    the empty string, relates to customer-provided keys mode (SSE-C)
    which is not supported at the moment.

Each data location object also contains the following attributes:

```
"location": [
    {
        // other location attributes: "key" etc.
        "cryptoScheme": 1,
        "cipheredDataKey": "d88SLogLTw8nzRyO0Tf0qynQPLubT0N9mBDAxEZ5ww0="
    }
]
```

* **cryptoScheme** is used to version the encryption method and
  parameters used internally, like the "salt" value.

* **cipheredDataKey** is the object data encryption key, itself stored

>   encrypted with the master key

Reviewer 3: Does it mean that, during the object's download, S3C doesn't need to contact the KMS server to decrypt the object?
